# MDDN 242 2023 Assignment 3: Data Mapping

## AI Renaissance by Hannah Kai Fong


I decided early in this assignment to use pictures from the Italy trip I took this year. Compared to other photos I already had/could take, this seemed like the most visually rich option for me. 
I went through a few different ideas based on the photographs I had taken. Initially, I was going to use photos from the art galleries and highlight the frames/paintings. However, I decided that this wasn't creative enough and it would be difficult to process the painting details. I chose to highlight my favourite buildings/architecture instead, as this was something that I was particularly appreciative of while there. 

The AI seemed to recognize buildings quite quickly. I made sure to include images with ground and water, for the AI to distinguish between them and the buildings. This worked well but in retrospect, I think I should have paid closer attention to humans within the mask e.g. in training image 2, I could have tried to distinguish between the buildings in the background and people in the foreground. Although the filter can recognise larger groups of people (e.g. it removed the crowds in testing image 2), I could have fine-tuned it a bit more. I found that the AI had limitations when it came to the smaller building parts e.g. antennas or satellites, as it couldn't recognise these. I had a look into fixing this, but I wasn't able to and ultimately decided that it wouldn't detract from the final output, so I moved on.

When it came to the filter effect, I started with colour. The image that I submitted for our first 'check-up' session, was my first test of highlighting the buildings by removing the saturation from the background and drawing the buildings with pointalism. This looked fine but it wasn't particularly interesting or textural. 
Thinking of texture and the art I had seen in Italy, I thought it could be fun to create a painted effect on the image. When I initially thought of texture and paintings, I thought of Van Gogh. I briefly played with the idea of changing my masks to just windows and having these glow in yellow, while the rest of the image was hues of blue to imitate Van Gogh's Starry Night. After mulling over this idea for a bit, I decided not to do it, as it didn't make sense to imitate a piece of art that had no connection to Italy. 
Building on this idea and returning to the random name I had given my first check-up, 'AI Renaissance', I decided to create a filter that highlighted the beauty of Italy's buildings by simulating a Renaissance painting. 

To start this idea off, I wanted to find a way to simulate paint strokes. From my initial Van Gogh research, I rediscovered an effect I used last year - Perlin noise. I used this code - https://openprocessing.org/sketch/708075 (digital sketch of a Van Gogh painting using Perlin noise) to help me create the paint stroke effect. I adjusted a lot of it and simplified it so it better fit my idea and so I better understood it. I tested this effect on the buildings and background. I decided it better suited the background as it had a blurring effect that wouldn't 'highlight' the buildings well. I was very pleased with how this effect turned out, and I think it added a unique quality to the final images.

To distinguish the buildings, I tried a few options. I went through some tests of changing the hue and brightness however, this was jarring and didn't simulate the Renaissance paintings well. I came back to pointillism but changed the 'points' to rectangles. As I was playing with the size of these, it started to remind me of cracking paint.  I started looking into this a bit more. Having the rectangles all the same size looked too uniform and lacked interest. To fix this, I created an array of numbers and randomly added these numbers to the initialised rectangle height and width. Although this is quite a small change, I felt that it stopped the buildings from feeling so static. I visually enjoyed this effect and I thought it fit into my theme nicely (now leaning towards an aged renaissance painting rather than one that had been restored), so I decided to keep it. 

From my brief look into art history, I knew that there tends to be a base colour used as an underpainting. To replicate this effect in my filter, I tested different background colours and their visibility on the 'canvas'. I initially looked at burnt umber/burnt sienna as these were common tones used for underpainting by artists such as Rembrandt and Caravaggio. This created an interesting effect but made the images too dark. I decided to lean into a more Michaelangelo/ Boticelli aesthetic, which is much lighter and has a light blue/cream glow to it. I settled on the eggshell-coloured background as I felt that it imitated this look quite nicely. The lighter look also echoed the aging effect I had started to run with. 
To highlight this aspect of the filter, I decided to decrease the alpha of the paint-stroke effect to let the background seep through. I think this created a lot more unity within the images, which I'm really happy with. 
I also played around with the number of elements being drawn in both the background and foreground. I settled on the final number as there were enough elements to define the buildings well, but still a few gaps to let the background colour shine through. 

I came back to the masking effect at the end of the assignment. I tested some more images to see if they were successfully being processed by the AI. This processing was successful, and  I chose my favourite of these outputs to put on the preview page. 

Finally, after getting feedback that I could further separate the buildings from the background, I did more colour testing. I attempted to use the HSB colour mode and lower the background saturation to define the mask. This created an interesting effect but it didn't fit well with my Renaissance painting theme. I went back to playing with the alpha of the background. I decided that lowering this even more did create a better definition of the mask, which is what can be seen in my final outputs. 

Overall, I'm quite happy with my final outputs. I think the code highlights the buildings in the images well while sticking with the aged Renaissance painting theme. 
I think the softness of the background effect contrasts well with the bolder buildings without clashing too much. I could have done better at highlighting the details of the architecture, to lean more into the 'beauty' part of the theme and improve on the overall aesthetic. I would have also liked to play with the colours more - perhaps manipulate the images into a specific 'Renaissance' colour palette however, I ran out of time to do so. 

As for the mask aspect of the assignment, I think my outputs do the job however, I should have paid more attention to the details - such as the inclusion of people, to refine my output. If I had more time, I would have also looked into creating a second mask for people within the image, and manipulating this (perhaps removing them from the images entirely to clean up the aesthetics). 




